Update  article
Basic  principles  of  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  and
repetitive  TMS  (rTMS)
Wanalee  Klomjaia,  Rose  Katzb,c,  Alexandra  Lackmy-Valle ´eb,*
aFaculty  of  Physical  Therapy,  Mahidol  University,  73170  Nakonpathom,  Thailand
bUPMC  Universite ´Paris  06,  CNRS,  Inserm,  laboratoire  d’imagerie  biome ´dicale,  Sorbonne  universite ´s,  75013  Paris,  France
cService  de  me´decine  physique  et  re´adaptation,  groupe  hospitalier  Pitie´-Salpe ˆtrie`re,  AP–HP,  France
1.  Introduction
Over  the  past  decades,  neuroscience  researchers  have  beneﬁted
from  technical  advancements  in  non-invasive  brain  stimulation  in
humans.  Transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  is  one  method
used  to  deliver  electrical  stimuli  through  the  scalp  in  conscious
humans.  In  general,  single-pulse  TMS  (including  paired-pulse  TMS)
is  used  to  explore  brain  functioning,  whereas  repetitive  TMS
(rTMS)  is  used  to  induce  changes  in  brain  activity  that  can  last
beyond  the  stimulation  period.  Non-invasive  TMS  of  the  motor
cortex  leads  to  a  twitch  in  the  target  muscle  evoking  motor-evoked
potential  (MEP)  on  electromyography.  The  MEP  is  usually  used  to
assess  the  corticospinal  tract  excitability.  The  physiological  bases
underlying  modulations  induced  by  TMS  and  rTMS  have  not  been
elucidated.  The  main  knowledge  is  still  from  animal  studies  and  in
vitro  experiments  performed  on  hippocampal  slices.  The  purpose
of  the  present  review  is  to  discuss  the  main  points  of  TMS  to  allow
for  a  better  understanding  of  its  mechanisms.2.  Animal  experiments
During  the  20th  century,  animal  studies  provided  the  ﬁrst
evidence  of  the  effect  of  a  single  electrical  pulse  given  by  a  probe
directly  applied  over  the  motor  cortex  [1].  In  these  experiments,
the  skull  was  removed  to  expose  the  brain.  This  set-up  with
implanted  electrodes  allowed  for  recording  the  discharges  from
subcortical  ﬁbers  and  ﬁbers  of  the  pyramidal  decussation.  Later,
Patton  and  Amassian  showed  that  the  response  evoked  in
pyramidal  ﬁbers  by  electrical  stimulation  of  the  motor  cortex
were  spaced  from  1  to  2  ms  [2].  At  a  response  threshold,  anodal
stimulation  evoked  a  ﬁrst  volley  in  the  pyramidal  tract,  which  was
followed,  with  increasing  stimulation  intensity,  by  later  volleys
separated  by  a  periodicity  of  1.5  ms.  Different  conditions  were
tested  to  determine  the  origins  of  these  descending  volleys
induced  by  anodal  stimulation.  The  ﬁrst  volley  recruited  appeared
not  to  be  affected  by  cortex  cooling  and  was  maintained  after
removal  of  the  cortical  grey  matter,  whereas  later  volleys  were
depressed  by  cortex  cooling  and  disappeared  when  the  grey  matter
was  removed.  The  authors  hypothesized  that  the  ﬁrst  volley
resulted  from  direct  stimulation  of  pyramidal  tract  axons,  called
direct  wave  (D-wave),  whereas  later  volleys  came  from  synaptic
activation  of  the  same  pyramidal  tract  neurons,  called  indirect
waves  (I-waves).  The  recruitment  order  of  descending  volleys
evoked  in  the  pyramidal  tract  by  anodal  stimulation  wasAnnals  of  Physical  and  Rehabilitation  Medicine  58  (2015)  208–213
A  R  T  I  C  L  E  I  N  F  O
Article  history:
Received  13  March  2015
Accepted  31  May  2015
Keywords:
Transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)
Human
CortexA  B  S  T  R  A  C  T
Transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  and  repetitive  TMS  (rTMS)  are  indirect  and  non-invasive
methods  used  to  induce  excitability  changes  in  the  motor  cortex  via  a  wire  coil  generating  a  magnetic
ﬁeld  that  passes  through  the  scalp.  Today,  TMS  has  become  a  key  method  to  investigate  brain  functioning
in  humans.  Moreover,  because  rTMS  can  lead  to  long-lasting  after-effects  in  the  brain,  it  is  thought  to  be
able  to  induce  plasticity.  This  tool  appears  to  be  a  potential  therapy  for  neurological  and  psychiatric
diseases.  However,  the  physiological  mechanisms  underlying  the  effects  induced  by  TMS  and  rTMS  have
not  yet  been  clearly  identiﬁed.  The  purpose  of  the  present  review  is  to  summarize  the  main  knowledge
available  for  TMS  and  rTMS  to  allow  for  understanding  their  mode  of  action  and  to  specify  the  different
parameters  that  inﬂuence  their  effects.  This  review  takes  an  inventory  of  the  most-used  rTMS  paradigms
in  clinical  research  and  exhibits  the  hypotheses  commonly  assumed  to  explain  rTMS  after-effects.
/C223  2015  Elsevier  Masson  SAS.  All  rights  reserved.
*Corresponding  author.  ER6  UPMC  University  Paris  6,  Service  MPR,
Hoˆpital  Pitie´-Salpe ˆtrie`re,  47,  boulevard  de  l’Hoˆpital,  75651  Paris  cedex  13,  France.
Tel.:  +33  1  42  16  11  00;  fax:  +33  1  42  16  11  02.
E-mail  address:  alexandra.lackmy@upmc.fr  (A.  Lackmy-Valle ´e).Available  online  at
ScienceDirect
www.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rehab.2015.05.005
1877-0657/ /C223  2015  Elsevier  Masson  SAS.  All  rights  reserved.
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Duke University from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on September 14, 2023. 
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.accurately  deﬁned  by  Kernell  and  Chien-Ping,  who  conﬁrmed  that
the  D-wave  was  the  ﬁrst  volley  recruited  and  showed  that  it  was
followed  3  and  4.5  ms  later  by  an  I2-wave  and  I3-wave,  respectively
[3].  However,  an  I1-wave  occurring  1.5  ms  later  than  the  D-wave
was  evoked  only  with  high  stimulation  intensities.  The  authors
also  found  that  the  amplitude  of  descending  volleys  induced  in  the
pyramidal  neurons  increased  in  parallel  with  stimulation  intensity
of  the  motor  cortex.
3.  First  experiments  of  transcranial  stimulation  in  humans
In  1980,  Merton  and  Morton  succeeded  in  electrically
stimulating  the  motor  cortex  through  the  scalp  in  conscious
humans  by  using  transcranial  electrical  stimulation  (TES)  [4].  The
electrical  impulse  was  given  by  2  electrodes  placed  over  the  scalp,
one  applied  over  the  arm  motor  area  and  the  other  4  cm  above  the
ﬁrst  one.  Electrodes  were  connected  to  a  high-capacity  condenser
(0.1  mF)  charged  up  to  2000  V.  TES  led  to  a  twitch  in  contralateral
arm  muscles,  which  evoked  MEP  on  electromyography  (EMG).
However,  TES  appeared  to  be  uncomfortable  and  painful.  Only
some  fraction  of  the  current  was  thought  to  pass  through  the  scalp
and  reach  the  cortex,  whereas  the  main  fraction  of  the  current
spreading  between  the  2  electrodes  was  considered  to  evoke
contraction  of  the  scalp  muscles  and  induce  local  pain.  In  1985,
Baker  and  colleagues  proposed  replacing  TES  with  TMS  [5].  TMS
directs  a  magnetic  ﬁeld  of  several  Teslas  via  a  wire  coil.  In  1990,
Tofts  proposed  a  model  of  the  distribution  of  TMS-induced
currents  in  the  central  nervous  system  [6].  He  suggested  that  as
the  magnetic  ﬁeld  changes  rapidly,  circular  electrical  currents  are
induced.  The  currents  ﬂow  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the
magnetic  ﬁeld.  So,  current  ﬂows  induced  by  TMS  are  in  an  annulusunderneath  the  coil.  If  the  circular  coil  is  placed  ﬂat  on  the  scalp,
currents  ﬂow  in  a  plane  parallel  to  both  the  coil  and  the  scalp.  The
force  of  magnetic  ﬁeld  induced  by  TMS  can  be  reduced  by
extracerebral  tissues  (scalp,  bone,  meninges),  but  it  is  still  able  to
induce  an  electrical  ﬁeld  sufﬁcient  to  depolarize  superﬁcial  axons
and  to  activate  networks  in  the  cortex  [7].  However,  because  the
impedance  of  gray  matter  is  greater  than  that  of  white  matter,
electrical  currents  in  subcortical  structures  are  weaker  than  in
superﬁcial  layers,  so  subcortical  structures  such  as  the  basal
ganglia  and  thalamus  are  not  activated  by  TMS.
4.  Spinal  motoneuron  recruitment  in  response  to  TMS
On  the  basis  of  the  Tofts  model  [6],  TMS  preferentially  activates
neurons  oriented  horizontally  in  a  plane  that  is  parallel  to  both  the
coil  and  the  brain  surface.  As  with  TES,  TMS  applied  over  the  motor
cortex  induces  descending  volleys  in  the  pyramidal  tract  projecting
on  spinal  motoneurons,  also  termed  corticospinal  tracts.  Motor-
neuron  activation  in  response  to  corticospinal  volleys  induced  by
TMS  evokes  MEP  on  EMG  recorded  by  using  surface  electrodes
applied  over  the  muscle  belly.  In  practice,  the  peak-to-peak
amplitude  of  the  MEP  and  the  motor  threshold  (MT),  deﬁned  by  the
minimum  TMS  intensity  required  to  evoke  MEP  of  at  least  50  mV  in
about  50%  of  5  to  10  consecutive  trials  [8],  are  both  parameters
used  to  estimate  the  excitability  of  corticospinal  pathways  (Fig.  1).
In  1987,  a  study  showed  that  the  ﬁrst  motor  unit  recruited  during
minimal  voluntary  contraction  was  also  that  recruited  by  TMS  of
the  motor  cortex;  the  order  of  recruitment  was  the  same  with  TMS
and  with  voluntary  contraction  [9].  Motor  units  are  recruited  in  an
orderly  sequence  from  the  smallest  to  the  largest  according  to  the
size  principle  [10].
Fig.  1.  Transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  applied  over  the  motor  cortex  preferentially  activates  interneurons  oriented  in  a  plane  parallel  to  the  brain  surface.  This
placement  leads  to  a  transynaptic  activation  of  pyramidal  cells  evoking  descending  volleys  in  the  pyramidal  axons  projecting  on  spinal  motoneurons,  also  termed  the
corticospinal  tract.  Motoneuron  activation  in  response  to  corticospinal  volleys  induced  by  TMS  leads  to  a  contraction  in  the  target  muscle  evoking  a  motor-evoked  potential
(MEP)  on  electromyography  (EMG)  recorded  by  using  surface  electrodes  applied  over  the  muscle  belly.  Its  peak-to-peak  amplitude  is  used  to  estimate  excitability  of  the
corticospinal  tract.W.  Klomjai  et  al.  /  Annals  of  Physical  and  Rehabilitation  Medicine  58  (2015)  208–213  209
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Duke University from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on September 14, 2023. 
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.5.  Physiological  bases  of  TMS  measures  used  to  estimate
corticospinal  excitability
From  pharmacolocial  studies  with  healthy  volunteers,  TMS
measures  used  to  estimate  motor  cortical  and  corticospinal
excitability  such  as  MT  and  MEP  are  assumed  to  rely  on  different
physiological  mechanisms.  Thus,  the  MT,  which  depends  on
excitability  of  cortico-cortical  axons  and  their  excitatory  contacts
to  corticospinal  neurons,  is  inﬂuenced  by  agents  blocking  voltage-
gated  sodium  channels  that  are  crucial  in  regulating  axon
excitability  [11]  and  by  agents  acting  on  ionotropic  non-N-
methyl-D-aspartate  (non-NMDA)  glutamate  receptors  such  as
ketamine  that  are  responsible  for  fast  excitatory  synaptic
transmission  in  the  cortex  [12].  In  contrast,  other  neurotransmit-
ters  and  neuromodulator  systems  such  as  GABA,  dopamine,
norepinephrine,  serotonin  or  acetylcholine  have  no  effect  on  MT.
As  for  MT,  the  MEP  can  be  depressed  by  agents  that  inactivate
sodium  channels  such  as  volatile  anesthetics  [13].  MEP  reduction  is
hypothesized  to  result  from  reduced  excitability  of  I-waves  due  to
sodium-channel  inactivation,  which  leads  to  decreased  action
potential  ﬁring  and  in  turn  reduces  calcium  entry  at  the  presynaptic
terminal  and  ﬁnally  synaptic  transmission  [14].  Moreover,  MEP
amplitude  was  found  to  vary  after  the  application  of  modulators  of
inhibitory  and  excitatory  transmission  in  neuronal  networks.  For
instance,  MEP  is  depressed  by  modulators  of  GABA Areceptors  or
increased  by  dopamine  agonists  and  various  norepinephrine
agonists.  Of  note,  changes  in  MEP  amplitude  can  occur  without
signiﬁcant  changes  in  MT,  which  supports  the  notion  of  a
fundamental  difference  in  physiology  between  the  2  measures  [15].
6.  Descending  volleys  induced  in  the  corticospinal  tract
In  1990,  direct  epidural  recordings  were  performed  in
anesthetized  subjects  to  compare  descending  volleys  evoked  by
TES  and  TMS  in  the  corticospinal  tract  [16].  The  pattern  of
recruitment  of  corticospinal  volleys  evoked  by  TES  seemed  to
closely  resemble  that  evoked  in  animals  by  anodal  electrical
stimulation  of  the  motor  cortex:  D-wave,  late  I-waves,  then  early  I-
wave.  This  ﬁnding  suggests  that  TES  preferentially  activates
cortical  neurons  in  a  plane  vertical  to  the  surface  brain.  The  D-
wave  induced  by  TES  is  thought  to  result  from  excitation  of
pyramidal  tract  axons  at  the  initial  segment  [17,18] .  Consistent
with  the  Tofts  model  [6],  the  recruitment  pattern  of  corticospinal
volleys  induced  by  TMS  differed  from  that  evoked  by  TES,  as
attested  by  epidural  recordings.  With  increasing  TMS  intensity,  the
I3-wave  was  ﬁrst  recruited,  followed  by  the  I2-wave,  then  I1-wave.
In  a  few  subjects,  the  D-wave  could  be  evoked  with  high  TMS
intensities.  These  results  conﬁrmed  that  TMS  preferentially
activates  cortical  interneurons  relaying  excitatory  inputs  to
pyramidal  neurons.
7.  Variability  of  TMS-induced  responses
The  path  and  strength  of  an  electrical  ﬁeld  generated  in  the
brain  by  TMS  depends  on  many  physical  and  biological  parameters
such  as  magnetic  pulse  waveform;  shape  and  orientation  of  the
coil;  intensity,  frequency  and  pattern  of  stimulation;  orientation  of
the  current  lines  induced  in  the  brain;  and  excitable  neural
elements.  TMS  can  deliver  a  monophasic  pulse  or  biphasic  pulses.
Monophasic  magnetic  pulses  are  commonly  used  for  single-pulse
experiments,  whereas  biphasic  stimulus  waveforms  are  usually
required  in  rTMS  experiments  because  of  the  lower  energy
requirements  [19].  The  effect  of  mono-  and  biphasic  pulses  can
be  compared  if  the  second  and  decisive  phase  of  the  biphasic  pulse
is  taken  as  the  equivalent  of  the  initial  monophasic  pulse  [7].  Theeffectiveness  of  stimulation  appears  to  vary  according  to  the
direction  of  currents  induced  in  the  motor  cortex  [20].
Various  kinds  of  coils  with  different  geometries  and  sizes  have
been  developed  and  include  the  circular  coil,  ﬁgure-of-eight  coil,
double-cone  coil,  air-cooled  coil  and,  more  recently,  the  Hesed  coil
[21],  c-Core  coil  and  circular  crown  coil  [7].  Currents  induced  by
circular  coils  widely  spread  under  the  windings  and  activate
superﬁcial  cortical  layers.  Circular  coils  are  recommended  for
stimulating  large  and  superﬁcial  motor  areas  such  as  upper-limb
motor  areas.  However,  the  ﬁgure-of-eight  coil  provides  a  focused
stimulation;  the  electric  ﬁeld  is  at  its  maximum  under  its  center
(hot  spot),  where  the  2  rings  meet,  for  a  more  accurately  deﬁned
area.  The  electric  ﬁeld  of  double-cone  coils  can  reach  deep  cortical
layers.  This  coil  is  mainly  recommended  for  stimulating  the  motor
areas  of  lower  limbs  that  are  located  deep  inside  the  inter-
hemispheric  ﬁssure  [22].  Nevertheless,  the  double-cone  coil  is  not
focal.  A  single  TMS  via  a  double-cone  coil  over  M1  evokes  bilateral
responses  in  upper  and  lower  limbs  and  also  a  contraction  in  facial
muscles.  The  direction  of  current  lines  derives  from  the  orientation
and  position  of  the  coil  over  brain  gyri  and  sulci.  In  most  studies,
TMS  is  used  to  stimulate  M1.  If  the  ﬁgure-of-eight  coil  over  M1  is
oriented  parallel  to  the  inter-hemispheric  ﬁssure,  current  ﬂows  in
the  posterior–anterior  direction  and  activates  the  pyramidal  tract
indirectly  via  the  recruitment  of  excitatory  interneurons.  Thus,
posteriorly  directed  currents  in  the  brain  preferentially  elicit  late
volleys  in  the  corticospinal  tract.  However,  if  the  ﬁgure-of-eight
coil  is  oriented  perpendicular  to  the  inter-hemispheric  ﬁssure,  an
early  I-wave  and  even  a  D-wave  can  be  recorded  [23].
Recently,  navigated  brain  stimulation  (NBS)  has  been  devel-
oped  to  facilitate  the  use  of  TMS.  NBS  devices  consist  of  an  infrared
camera  detecting  trackers  placed  on  a  headband  worn  by  the
subject  and  on  the  coil.  From  MRI  brain  data,  NBS  is  able  to  rebuild
the  subject’s  head  in  3-D  and  to  record  the  coil  position.  Some
devices  can  measure  the  strength  and  direction  of  the  electric  ﬁeld
induced  in  the  brain  by  TMS.  More  than  just  being  an  improvement
of  TMS  measurement,  NBS  offers  the  possibility  of  reliably
stimulating  other  brain  areas  such  as  the  premotor  cortex,
cerebellum,  sensory  areas  and  cognitive  areas.
8.  Paired-pulse  TMS  methods
Paired-pulse  TMS  methods  have  been  developed  since  the  late
20th  century.  Paired-pulse  TMS  consists  of  2  successive  pulses
through  the  same  coil,  delivered  with  a  short  inter-stimulus
interval  (ISI)  of  a  few  milliseconds  or  a  long  ISI  (from  tens  to
hundreds  of  milliseconds).  In  practice,  both  pulses  are  applied  over
the  same  point  of  the  dominant  hemisphere  over  the  motor  cortex.
This  method  is  used  to  explore  inhibitory  or  excitatory  intracortical
networks  depending  on  the  intensity  and  ISI  used  [24–26] .  Never-
theless,  paired-pulse  TMS  can  reveal  inhibitory  cortical  networks
more  easily  than  excitatory  networks,  which  are  less  investigated.
Two  TMS  pulses  can  also  be  delivered  over  each  hemisphere  at  the
same  point  of  the  motor  cortex  so  as  to  explore  inter-hemispheric
inhibition  (or  transcallosal  inhibition)  [27].
9.  rTMS  methods
Contrary  to  single-pulse  TMS,  rTMS  is  able  to  change  and
modulate  cortical  activity  beyond  the  stimulation  period,  as  a
potential  method  for  the  treatment  of  neurological  and  psychiatric
disorders.  The  physiological  bases  of  rTMS  after-effects  have  not
yet  been  clearly  identiﬁed.  Many  arguments  support  the  idea  that
the  mechanisms  underlying  rTMS  after-effects  resemble  long-term
potentiation  (LTP)  and  long-term  depression  (LTD)  described  in
animals.W.  Klomjai  et  al.  /  Annals  of  Physical  and  Rehabilitation  Medicine  58  (2015)  208–213 210
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Duke University from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on September 14, 2023. 
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.10.  Potential  cellular  mechanisms  inducing  LTP  and  LTD
LTP  and  LTD  are  broad  terms  that  traduce  long-term  changes  in
synaptic  strength  that  can  occur  in  experimental  conditions  after
brief  high-frequency  stimulation.  LTP  is  deﬁned  as  an  increase  in
synaptic  strength,  whereas  LTD  reﬂects  a  decrease  in  synaptic
strength.  These  concepts  were  introduced  in  1973  by  Bliss  and
Gardner-Medwin,  who  showed  in  rabbits  that  trains  of  high-
frequency  stimulation  delivered  to  pyramidal  cell  axons  in  the
hippocampus  led  to  a  long-lasting  increase  in  the  amplitude  of
excitatory  postsynaptic  potentials  [28].  Thus,  if  weak  and  strong
inputs  were  activated  together,  the  temporal  order  of  the  pre-  and
post-synaptic  spiking  determined  whether  LTP  or  LTD  was  induced.
On  stimulating  ﬁrst  the  presynaptic  neuron,  then  the  postsynaptic
neuron  (pre–post)  within  an  interval  of  tens  of  milliseconds,  LTP  is
induced,  whereas  with  stimulation  in  the  reverse  order  (post–pre),
LTD  is  induced.  No  changes  in  the  synaptic  strength  were  observed  if
the  ISI  was  longer  than  100  ms  [29].  The  extensive  literature  on  this
issue  stresses  that  plasticity  changes  depend  on  the  synapses  and  the
circuits  in  which  they  operate.  Several  arguments  suggest  that  LTP
can  be  induced  by  activation  of  NMDA  receptors.  This  post-synaptic
receptor  has  an  intrinsic  cation-channel  blocked  by  Mg  ions  when
the  cell  is  at  its  normal  resting  potential.  When  the  synaptic  neuron
is  sufﬁciently  depolarized,  Mg2+ions  are  ejected  to  open  the  NMDA-
receptor  cation-channel.  The  calcium  entrance  in  post-synaptic  cells
activates  a  calcium-sensitive  signalling  pathway,  which  has  many
downstream  targets  that  induce  changes  in  pre-  and  post-synaptic
neurons  leading  to  increased  synaptic  strength.  One  of  these  effects
is  increased  post-synaptic  neuron  sensitivity  to  glutamate  according
to  a  mechanism  involving  alpha-amino-3-hydroxyl-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic  acid  (AMPA)  receptors  [30].  Moreover,  experi-
ments  with  hippocampal  slices  revealed  that  nitric  oxide  (NO),  a
membrane-soluble  neuronal  messenger,  could  contribute  to  synap-
tic  plasticity  in  the  brain.  Inhibitors  of  NO  synthase  (NOS)  could
suppress  the  induction  of  LTP  in  the  hippocampus  and  block  LTD  in
the  cerebellum  [31].  The  NO  contribution  to  synaptic  plasticity
depends  on  the  strength  (i.e.,  intensity,  frequency  or  duration)  of
tetanic  stimulation.  Thus,  LTP  induced  by  weak  tetanic  stimulation
would  be  blocked  by  NOS  inhibitors,  whereas  stronger  tetanic
stimulation  would  lead  to  NO-independent  potentiation  [32].  More-
over,  NO  paired  with  low-frequency  stimulation  (0.25  Hz)  produces
long-lasting  depression  rather  than  potentiation  [33].  Whether  NO
affects  plasticity  by  facilitating  potentiation  mechanisms  or
contributes  to  LTP  induction  by  inhibiting  LTD  is  unclear.
Concerning  LTD,  its  induction  reverses  the  LTP  effects  or  LTD  is
induced  de  novo .  Several  hypotheses  suggest  that  LTD  induction
also  results  from  activation  of  NMDA  receptors,  thereby  leading  to
increased  Ca2+concentration.  Contrary  to  LTP  induction,  which
would  be  due  to  a  large  and  fast  increase  in  Ca2+concentration,  LTD
induction  would  arise  from  a  small  and  slow  increase  in  Ca2+
content.  In  vitro ,  LTD  is  induced  by  low-frequency  stimulations
delivered  for  long  periods  (600–00  pulses),  whereas  LTP  occurs
after  short  train  stimulations  delivered  at  high  frequencies.
Changes  in  synaptic  strength  resulting  from  LTP  or  LTD  are
commonly  divided  into  2  phases:
/C15  a  short  phase  (early  LTP  or  LTD)  when  changes  last  for  only  30  to
60  min;
/C15  a  long  phase  (late  LTP  or  LTD)  when  modiﬁcations  of  protein
synthesis  occur  [30].
11.  rTMS  protocols
Numerous  rTMS  protocols  have  reported  different  after-effects.
An  after-effect  induced  by  rTMS  depends  on  stimulation  frequencyand  duration  of  the  stimulation  period  [34].  Low-frequency
stimulation  (<  1  Hz)  has  inhibitory  effects,  whereas  high-
frequency  stimulation  (>  5  Hz)  leads  to  excitatory  effects  in  the
brain.  The  duration  of  the  after-effects  seems  to  vary  in  parallel
with  the  length  of  the  stimulation.  A  longer  stimulation  induces  a
longer  duration  of  after-effects.
Simple  rTMS  protocols  have  individual  stimuli  that  are  spaced
by  identical  ISI  (Fig.  2).  In  most  low-frequency  rTMS  studies,  the
stimulation  frequency  is  usually  set  at  1  Hz,  with  stimulation
intensity  and  pulse  number  varying  among  studies.  Low-
frequency  rTMS  (1  Hz)  is  considered  to  have  an  inhibitory  effect
but  at  low  intensities  (less  than  MT),  1-Hz  rTMS  often  fails  to
have  measurable  effects  on  motor  excitability.  Some  ﬁndings
indicate  that  variability  of  response  to  1-Hz  rTMS  might  be
related  to  the  level  of  motor  cortex  excitability  of  the  targeted
muscle.  1-Hz  rTMS  suppresses  MEP  only  when  the  target  muscle
is  at  rest.  The  depression  of  MEP  could  be  increased  if  1-Hz  rTMS
is  preceded  by  a  high-frequency  subthreshold  stimulation  as
compared  to  no  preconditioning  stimulus.  This  increase  in
cortical  depression  lasts  for  at  least  60  min  [35].  In  contrast,
high-frequency  rTMS  (5-25  Hz)  is  thought  to  increase  cortical
excitability.  Berardelli  et  al.  reported  that  5-Hz  rTMS  set  at  120%
of  the  MT  facilitated  MEP  for  1  s  [36].  However,  the  duration  of
effects  induced  by  high-frequency  rTMS  varies  according  to
stimulation  intensity,  pulse  number  and  stimulation  frequency.
High-frequency  rTMS  after-effects  can  persist  up  to  90  min  after
stimulation  in  some  cases.  However,  after-effects  induced  by
high-frequency  rTMS  could  be  reversed  because  of  stimulation
intensity.  Low  intensity  (less  than  MT)  tends  to  decrease  cortical
excitability,  whereas  high  intensity  (greater  than  MT)  increases
cortical  excitability  [37].  As  for  low-frequency  rTMS,  modula-
tions  induced  by  high-frequency  rTMS  depend  on  the  level  of
excitability  of  motor  neurons  of  the  target  muscle.  If  subjects
perform  a  brief  isometric  contraction  of  the  target  muscle,  the
MEP  facilitation  induced  by  5-Hz  rTMS  is  longer  than  that
observed  in  subjects  at  rest  [38].
Besides  simple  rTMS  protocols,  new  rTMS  protocols  have
been  developed.  The  most  used  is  theta  burst  stimulation  (TBS),
which  has  been  used  in  animal  studies  to  induce  synaptic
plasticity.  The  pattern  of  TBS  is  based  on  the  brain’s  natural
theta  rhythm  occurring  in  the  hippocampus.  TBS  consists  of
bursts  of  high-frequency  stimulation  (Fig.  2).  The  intensity  is
subthreshold,  usually  set  at  80%  of  the  MT.  Different  patterns  of
TBS  produce  different  effects  on  motor  cortex  excitability.  An
intermittent  TBS  (iTBS)  protocol,  with  TBS  applied  for  2  s  and
then  repeated  every  10  s,  increases  motor  cortex  excitability
[34,39,40] .  A  continuous  TBS  (cTBS)  protocol,  with  TBS  repeated
for  40  s  without  any  pause,  induces  a  consistent  depression  of
the  MEP.  The  duration  of  the  TBS  after-effects  depends  on
stimulation.  iTBS  applied  for  a  total  of  190  s  increases  MEP  for  at
least  15  min,  whereas  40  s  of  cTBS  depresses  MEP  for
approximately  60  min.  TBS  is  assumed  to  produce  a  mixture
of  facilitatory  and  inhibitory  effects,  facilitation  building  up
faster  than  inhibition  [39].  Of  note,  results  of  TBS  protocols  seem
more  consistent  than  those  of  simple  rTMS  protocols,  likely
because  in  TBS  studies,  stimulation  intensity  and  number  of
pulses  applied  are  approximately  equal,  which  is  not  the  case  in
simple  rTMS  studies  [30].
The  last  TMS  protocol  detailed  in  this  review  is  termed  paired
associative  stimulation  (PAS),  introduced  by  Stefan,  in  2000.  PAS
protocols  combine  a  repetitive  stimulation  of  somatosensory
afferents  with  TMS  over  the  contralateral  motor  cortex  [34]
(Fig.  2).  PAS  is  based  on  models  of  associative  LTP  or  the  Hebbian
concept  described  in  animals.  This  model  supports  that  converg-
ing  inputs  from  various  sources,  including  local  intracortical
ﬁbers  and  corticocortical  or  thalamocortical  afferents,  couldW.  Klomjai  et  al.  /  Annals  of  Physical  and  Rehabilitation  Medicine  58  (2015)  208–213  211
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Duke University from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on September 14, 2023. 
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.interact  to  reshape  local  representational  cortical  patterns
[41].  In  this  concept,  the  temporal  order  of  the  presynaptic  and
postsynaptic  spiking  determines  whether  LTP  and  LTD  is  induced
when  a  weak  and  strong  input  are  activated  together  [29].  In
humans,  the  nature  of  effects  induced  by  PAS  depends  on  the  ISI
between  the  electrical  peripheral  nerve  stimulation  and  cortical
stimulation.  If  the  ISI  is  shorter  than  the  afferent  delay  (time
required  for  the  peripheral  afferent  input  to  reach  the  brain),  PAS
depresses  the  excitability  in  the  motor  cortex.  In  contrast,  if  ISI  is
longer  than  the  afferent  delay,  PAS  increases  cortical  excitability
[42].  Pharmacological  studies  support  that  PAS  after-effects
would  rely  on  mechanisms  depending  on  NMDA  and  GABA Breceptors.  Furthermore,  dopamine  could  also  play  a  role  in
inducing  PAS  after-effects  [30].
12.  Conclusion
The  aim  of  the  present  review  was  to  summarize  the  main
knowledge  about  the  physiological  bases  of  TMS  and  rTMS.  Given
the  numerous  physical  and  biological  parameters  that  inﬂuence
TMS  responses,  effects  induced  by  TMS  and  rTMS  differ  among
studies,  so  calibrated  paradigms  need  to  be  deﬁned  to  increase
reproducibility.  The  great  variability  in  results  questions  the  use  ofLF rTMS
HF rTMS1s
1s
1scTBS
0.2s3 pulse train0.2s
1siTBS
8s
Periph  eral
nerve s/g415mula/g415onTMS TMS TMS
90 paired-s/g415mula/g415ons
ISI > aﬀerent  delay
ISI < aﬀerent  delayPAS
pre post
Fig.  2.  Simple  repetitive  TMS  (rTMS)  protocols  consist  of  identical  stimuli  spaced  by  an  identical  inter-stimulus  interval  (ISI).  Effects  depend  on  stimulation  frequency:  at  low
frequency  (LF  rTMS  <  1  Hz),  rTMS  depresses  excitability  in  the  motor  cortex,  whereas  at  high  frequency  (HF  rTMS  >  5  Hz),  cortical  excitability  is  increased.  Theta  burst
stimulation  (TBS)  involves  bursts  of  high-frequency  stimulation  (3  pulses  at  50  Hz)  repeated  with  an  ISI  of  200  ms  (5  Hz).  In  an  intermittent  TBS  (iTBS)  protocol,  bursts  are
delivered  for  2  s,  then  repeated  every  10  s  (2  s  of  TBS  followed  by  a  pause  of  8  s).  However,  in  a  continuous  TBS  protocol  (cTBS),  bursts  are  repeated  for  40  s  without  any  pause.
Paired  associative  stimulation  (PAS)  protocols  combine  a  repetitive  stimulation  of  peripheral  nerve  afferents  of  the  target  muscle  with  TMS  over  its  motor  area.  Intervention
consists  of  90  to  100  PAS.W.  Klomjai  et  al.  /  Annals  of  Physical  and  Rehabilitation  Medicine  58  (2015)  208–213 212
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Duke University from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on September 14, 2023. 
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.TMS  and  rTMS  in  clinical  trials.  However,  this  question  is  addressed
in  detail  in  this  issue.
Disclosure  of  interest
The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  conﬂicts  of  interest
concerning  this  article.
Acknowledgements
We  are  grateful  to  Genevie `ve  Bard  for  her  precious  support  in
collating  references  and  getting  the  text  into  a  presentable  order.
Funding:  this  work  was  supported  by  INSERM  and  MESR
(Ministe `re  de  l’enseignement  supe´rieur  et  de  la  recherche),  APHP
(Assistance  Publique-Ho ˆpitaux  de  Paris).
References
[1]  Adrian  ED,  Moruzzi  G.  Impulses  in  the  pyramidal  tract.  J  Physiol  1939;97:153–
99.
[2]  Patton  HD,  Amassian  VE.  Single  and  multiple-unit  analysis  of  cortical  stage  of
pyramidal  tract  activation.  J  Neurophysiol  1954;17:345–63.
[3]  Kernell  D,  Chien-Ping  WU.  Responses  of  the  pyramidal  tract  to  stimulation  of
the  baboon’s  motor  cortex.  J  Physiol  1967;191:653–72.
[4]  Merton  PA,  Morton  HB.  Stimulation  of  the  cerebral  cortex  in  the  intact  human
subject.  Nature  1980;285:27.
[5]  Barker  AT,  Jalinous  R,  Freeston  IL.  Non  invasive  stimulation  of  the  motor  cortex.
Lancet  1985;2:1106–7.
[6]  Tofts  PS.  The  distribution  of  induced  currents  in  magnetic  stimulation  of  the
nervous  system.  Phys  Med  Biol  1990;35:1119–28.
[7]  Lefaucheur  JP,  Andre ´-Obadia  N,  Antal  A,  et  al.  Evidence-based  guidelines  on  the
therapeutic  use  of  repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (rTMS).  Clin
Neurophysiol  2014;125:2150–206.
[8]  Boroojerdi  B,  Battaglia  F,  Muellbacher  W,  Cohen  LG.  Mechanisms  inﬂuencing
stimulus-response  properties  of  the  human  corticospinal  system.  Clin  Neu-
rophysiol  2001;112:931–7.
[9]  Hess  CW,  Mills  KR,  Murray  NM.  Responses  in  small  hand  muscles  from
magnetic  stimulation  of  the  human  brain.  J  Physiol  1987;388:397–419.
[10]  Henneman  E,  Mendell  LM.  Functional  organization  of  the  motoneuron  pool
and  its  inputs.  In:  Brooks  VB,  editor.  Handbook  of  Physiology  Section  I  The
Nervous  System  Motor  Control  Part  1,  vol.  II.  MD:  American  Physiological
Society  Bethesda;  1981.  p.  423–507.
[11]  Hodgkin  AL,  Huxley  AF.  A  quantitative  description  of  membrane  current  and  its
application  to  conduction  and  excitation  in  nerve.  J  Physiol  1952;117:500–44.
[12]  Douglas  R,  Martin  K.  Neocortex.  In:  Sheperd  GM,  editor.  The  synaptic  organi-
zation  of  the  brain..  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press;  1998.  p.  459–509.
[13]  Schmid  UD,  Boll  J,  Liechti  S,  Schmid  J,  Hess  CW.  Inﬂuence  of  some  anesthetic
agents  on  muscle  responses  to  transcranial  magnetic  cortex  stimulation:  a
pilot  study  in  humans.  Neurosurgery  1992;30:85–92.
[14]  Ziemann  U,  Lo¨nnecker  S,  Steinhoff  BJ,  Paulus  W.  Effects  of  antiepileptic  drugs
on  motor  cortex  excitability  in  humans:  a  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation
study.  Ann  Neurol  1996;40:367–78.
[15]  Ziemann  U.  TMS  and  drugs.  Clin  Neurophysiol  2004;115:1717–29.
[16]  Burke  D,  Hicks  R,  Gandevia  SC,  Stephen  J,  Woodforth  I,  Crawford  M.  Direct
comparison  of  corticospinal  volleys  in  human  subjects  to  transcranial  mag-
netic  and  electrical  stimulation.  J  Physiol  1993;470:383–93.
[17]  Amassian  VE,  Stewart  M,  Quirk  GJ,  Rosenthal  JL.  Physiological  basis  of  motor
effects  of  a  transient  stimulus  to  cerebral  cortex.  Neurosurgery  1987;20:74–93.
[18]  Rothwell  JC,  Thompson  PD,  Day  BL,  Boyd  S,  Marsden  CD.  Stimulation  of  the
human  motor  cortex  through  the  scalp.  Exp  Physiol  1991;76:159–200.[19]  Sommer  M,  Alfaro  A,  Rummel  M,  Speck  S,  Lang  N,  Tings  T,  et  al.  Half  sine,
monophasic  and  biphasic  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  of  the  human
motor  cortex.  Clin  Neurophysiol  2006;117:838–44.
[20]  Kammer  T,  Beck  S,  Thielscher  A,  Laubis-Herrmann  U,  Topka  H.  Motor  thres-
holds  in  humans:  a  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  study  comparing
different  pulse  waveforms,  current  directions  and  stimulator  types.  Clin
Neurophysiol  2001;112:250–8.
[21]  Roth  Y,  Zangen  A,  Hallett  M.  A  coil  design  for  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation
of  deep  brain  regions.  J  Clin  Neurophysiol  2002;19:361–70.
[22]  Hovey  C,  Jalinous  R.  The  guide  of  magnetic  stimulation.  Magstim  Guidelines
2008.
[23]  Sakai  K,  Ugawa  Y,  Terao  Y,  Hanajima  R,  Furubayashi  T,  Kanazawa  I.  Preferential
activation  of  different  I  waves  by  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  with  a
ﬁgure-of-eight-shaped  coil.  Exp  Brain  Res  1997;113:24–32.
[24]  Valls-Sole ´J,  Pascual-Leone  A,  Wassermann  EM,  Hallett  M.  Human  motor
evoked  responses  to  paired  transcranial  magnetic  stimuli.  Electroencephalogr
Clin  Neurophysiol  1992;85:355–64.
[25]  Kujirai  T,  Caramia  MD,  Rothwell  JC,  Day  BL,  Thompson  PD,  Ferbert  A,  et  al.
Corticocortical  inhibition  in  human  motor  cortex.  J  Physiol  1993;471:501–19.
[26]  Tokimura  H,  Ridding  MC,  Tokimura  Y,  Amassian  VE,  Rothwell  JC.  Short  latency
facilitation  between  pairs  of  threshold  magnetic  stimuli  applied  to  human
motor  cortex.  Electroencephalogr  Clin  Neurophysiol  1996;101:263–72.
[27]  Ferbert  A,  Priori  A,  Rothwell  JC,  Day  BL,  Colebatch  JG,  Marsden  CD.  Interhemi-
spheric  inhibition  of  the  human  motor  cortex.  J  Physiol  1992;453:525–46.
[28]  Bliss  TV,  Gardner-Medwin  AR.  Long-lasting  potentiation  of  synaptic  transmis-
sion  in  the  dentate  area  of  the  unanaestetized  rabbit  following  stimulation  of
the  perforant  path.  J  Physiol  1973;232:357–74.
[29]  Levy  WB,  Steward  O.  Temporal  contiguity  requirements  for  long-term  asso-
ciative  potentiation/depression  in  the  hippocampus.  Neuroscience  1983;8:
791–7.
[30]  Hoogendam  JM,  Ramakers  GM,  Di  Lazzaro  V.  Physiology  of  repetitive  trans-
cranial  magnetic  stimulation  of  the  human  brain.  Brain  Stimul  2010;3:
95–118.
[31]  Bo¨hme  GA,  Bon  C,  Stutzmann  JM,  Doble  A,  Blanchard  JC.  Possible  involvement
of  nitric  oxide  in  long-term  potentiation.  Eur  J  Pharmacol  1991;199:379–81.
[32]  Malen  PL,  Chapman  PF.  Nitric  oxide  facilitates  long-term  potentiation,  but  not
long-term  depression.  J  Neurosci  1997;17:2645–51.
[33]  Zhuo  M,  Kandel  ER,  Hawkins  RD.  Nitric  oxide  and  cGMP  can  produce  either
synaptic  depression  or  potentiation  depending  on  the  frequency  of  presyn-
aptic  stimulation  in  the  hippocampus.  Neuroreport  1994;5:1033–6.
[34]  Simonetta-Moreau  M.  Non-invasive  brain  stimulation  (NIBS)  and  motor
recovery  after  stroke.  Ann  Phys  Rehabil  Med  2014;57:530–42.
[35]  Lyer  MB,  Schleper  N,  Wassermann  EM.  Priming  stimulation  enhances  the
depressant  effect  of  low-frequency  repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimula-
tion.  J  Neurosci  2003;23:10867–72.
[36]  Berardelli  A,  Inghilleri  M,  Rothwell  JC,  Romeo  S,  Curra `A,  Gilio  F,  et  al.
Facilitation  of  muscle  evoked  responses  after  repetitive  cortical  stimulation
in  man.  Exp  Brain  Res  1998;122:79–84.
[37]  Modugno  N,  Nakamura  Y,  MacKinnon  CD,  et  al.  Motor  cortex  excitability
following  short  trains  of  repetitive  magnetic  stimuli.  Exp  Brain  Res
2001;140:453–9.
[38]  Samii  A,  Wassermann  EM,  Ikoma  K,  Mercuri  B,  Hallett  M.  Characterization  of
postexercise  facilitation  and  depression  of  motor  evoked  potentials  to  trans-
cranial  magnetic  stimulation.  Neurology  1996;46:1376–82.
[39]  Huang  YZ,  Edwards  MJ,  Rounis  E,  Bhatia  KP,  Rothwell  JC.  Theta  burst  stimula-
tion  of  the  human  motor  cortex.  Neuron  2005;45:201–6.
[40]  Di  Lazzaro  V,  Proﬁce  P,  Pilato  F,  Dileone  M,  Oliviero  A,  Ziemann  U.  The  effects  of
motor  cortex  rTMS  on  corticospinal  descending  activity.  Clin  Neurophysiol
2010;121:464–573.
[41]  Stefan  K,  Kunesch  E,  Cohen  LG,  Benecke  R,  Classen  J.  Induction  of  plasticity  in
the  human  motor  cortex  by  paired  associative  stimulation.  Brain  2000;123:
572–84.
[42]  Wolters  A,  Sandbrink  F,  Schlottmann  A,  Kunesch  E,  Stefan  K,  Cohen  LG,
Benecke  R,  et  al.  A  temporally  asymmetric  Hebbian  rule  governing  plasticity
in  the  human  motor  cortex.  J  Neurophysiol  2003;89:2339–45.W.  Klomjai  et  al.  /  Annals  of  Physical  and  Rehabilitation  Medicine  58  (2015)  208–213  213
Downloaded for Anonymous User (n/a) at Duke University from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on September 14, 2023. 
For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2023. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.